writing a proof in geometry can be a
daunting task some students struggle
with where to start
while others struggled to explain what
they believe is just plain obvious so in
this video I'm gonna introduce you to
two column proof and try and just
explain to you how to construct one so
we're gonna prove something that is
fairly obvious the goal is not to solve
a difficult problem it's just to provide
you with an example as you embark on
this journey into a new kind of math
math with words first we're going to
review some concepts and put them in our
toolbox an angle bisector is a ray that
divides an angle into two congruent
adjacent angles this is a definition
this means that if it is stated in the
problem that array is an angle bisector
then we can automatically definitively
conclude that the two adjacent angles
that it forms are congruent congruent
angles are defined as angles that have
equal measures again this is the
definition so if we conclude that a
couple angles are congruent then we can
definitively conclude that they must
have the same measure through the
definition of congruent angles
postulates differ from definitions these
are concepts that are so basic and
accepted by the mathematical community
that we all just agree that they're true
without some kind of logical proof or
justification in fact there isn't a
proof for them they just are the angle
addition postulate states that if point
B lies in the interior of angle AOC then
the sum of the measures of angles a OB
and b OC must equal the measure of the
larger angle angle AOC then we have
properties
and properties are various rules the
ones I'm going to talk about now are
algebraic rules that we can apply to
geometric problems that include
quantities to important properties are
the substitution property of equality
which states that if a equals B and
either A or B may be substituted for the
other in any equation or inequality and
the other is the transitive property of
equality which looks frankly a lot like
the substitution one it's a little bit
different it states that if a equals B
and B equals C then a must equal C the
distinction here is that we're talking
about an entire side of an equation
equaling another side that same side
equaling 1/3 side and then we can
basically get out the middleman and just
say that the first thing equal the last
thing and that's the transitive property
of equality so now that we've reviewed
all these properties let's take a look
at a common problem so in this diagram X
z-ray X Z is the angle bisector of angle
Y X B we also know that the measure of
YX z equals 58 degrees and we're
supposed to find the measure of the
larger angle Y X B now if you
encountered this problem on a quiz or
test he would be like this one is pretty
pretty easy basically since Ray XE is
the bisector then the larger angle is
twice that of the smaller so if I take 2
times 58 degrees I would get 116 and I'm
done well with the proof it's not about
finding the answer it's actually about
displaying the logic that you use to
find the answer
showing all of the accepted definitions
postulates properties and theorems that
you used along the way so
see how do we get from the given
information in our problem to our
solution so let's put this given
information on the left side of the
screen and we'll put the solution on the
right kind of make our way across so
what concepts did we use to get from
here to there well the first thing is
this idea of an angle bisector we know
through the definition that it creates
two adjacent congruent angles so we can
write this now that we know that we have
two congruent angles we can use the
definition of what it means to be
congruent to conclude that these two
angles have the same measure then if you
take a look at this other given piece of
information we can combine these two
things and use the transitive property
of equality to conclude this and now
we're gonna go to our postulate and
through the angle addition postulate we
know that we can add these two angles
and have the sum of their measures equal
the measure of the larger angle and then
finally with the substitution property
of equality we know that we can replace
these two values for these two angles
and then through simple addition we have
our answer whew I'm gonna translate this
into a two column proof by the way that
one's called a flow proof what we want
to do is we want to create two columns
the left one marked statements and the
right one marked reasons and then we're
gonna put put all of our equations and
given information under the statements
column and we're gonna number them in
logical order and then we're going to
put the names of definitions postulates
properties and theorems that we used to
make those conclusions on the right and
it's very important that you keep the
numbers
so any anything that you've concluded so
let's say we concluded this in step
three we need to say what definition or
postulate that we use to make that
conclusion on step three on the reasons
aside and another rule is that you your
logic should progress from top to bottom
so if you want to use a piece of given
information to make a conclusion you
have to make sure that you state it
before you use it now why do we go
through all of this what what are proofs
all about and why do we really have to
justify our logic in this way when the
solution frankly is pretty obvious well
we're practicing like any skill because
when you get into higher level
mathematics and you develop all these
brilliant theories that no one's ever
thought of and you turn around and you
need to explain them and justify them to
your peers who have you not yet thought
of them if you can't justify them
through accepted definitions and
theorems and and methods then they're
just gonna think you're crazy